How did France go from the dominant
monarchy of Europe to revolution,
terror, empire, and eventually a modern
state? Why did a kingdom that looked so
powerful collapse so violently? And how
did a revolution against absolute rule
end up clearing the path for Napoleon?
As simmering discontent in the late
1700s erupted into revolution, the
French nation was hurled into bloodshed,
political collapse, and a struggle over
who would rule it. Yet, out of that
chaos also came the enshrining of key
rights and principles, many of which
remain cornerstones of the nation today.
This is the story of how the old order
broke, how Napoleon rose from the
wreckage, and how repeated upheaval
remade France. At the opening of the
1700s, France was still under the reign
of Sun King Louis XIV, whose 72-year
rule remains one of the longest in
recorded history. Despite Louis's
monarchical absolutism, he had done much
to usher in the modern French nation
through his extensive centralization and
reforms. These further limited the power
of regional nobility, a process which
had been underway for centuries, and
served to develop the state apparatus.
France was the powerhouse of Europe
during the period. Its cultures and
traditions emulated across the
continent, and French the lingua franca
of the elite. Much had been achieved
since the tumultuous days of the
Reformation and wars of religion.
However, the monarch was aging, and
despite France's success, she was
economically indebted and overextended.
As previous centuries had shown, the
program of one king was never a mark of
the success of the next. Due to his
reign lasting so long, he outlived his
next direct heirs. So, it was his
grandson, Louis the 15th, who would
inherit the crown at the age of five.
For the first decades of his rule, much
of it was under custody of relatives.
The young Louis was able to reap the
rewards of his grandfather's productive
reign. France remained at the height of
its cultural power. He maintained these
outward displays through patronage of
the arts and an array of grand
buildings, with even more constructed
than under his predecessor. Internally,
though, things were stagnating. He made
few decisions which modernized the
nation, kept the tax burden on the poor
high, and undermined the standing of the
monarchy through the numerous financial
scandals its officials were implicated
in. Ultimately, while not a disastrous
king in his own right, the reportedly
timid Louis equally did little to
develop the nation or secure the
position of the monarchy in an
increasingly socially stratified France.
The Age of Enlightenment was now upon
Europe. It built on aspects of
Renaissance humanism and its emphasis on
rationality, but went further.
Empiricism, the primacy of science, and
a new philosophical and debating
tradition grew to dominate. It developed
both in France's elite educational
institutions and her vibrant urban
coffee house and salon scene. Informed
by expanding print networks, global
trade, and scientific exchange, it
marked a significant challenge to older
religious and traditional explanations
of politics and society. With titans of
the age like Voltaire making their mark,
the French monarch and state, now
well-established patrons of the art,
were initially supportive. However, as
this flourishing movement gains
momentum, they began to realize the
threat it posed. Demands now included
more rights for the common man and a
predictable challenge to the idea of the
divine right of kings. This was the
ideological underpinning of the future
revolution, which though it would take
decades to emerge, was now very much
simmering. While colonial holdings had
reached their height under his
predecessor, Louis the 15th would
oversee a drastic decline in fortunes
with France's loss to Britain in the
French and Indian War. This conflict's
theater was part of the broader Seven
Years' War being fought in Europe, and
in the concluding peace settlement of
1763, France was forced to surrender
most of its mainland's North American
empire to Britain, while Louisiana west
of the Mississippi went to Spain.
This was a heavy blow for a kingdom
already under financial strain. New
France had encompassed a huge area from
access to the rich fur grounds of the
Great Lakes region down to Louisiana in
the south. Its loss cut off strategic
territory and trade networks at a time
when the nation could ill afford another
blow, as well as damaging France's
international prestige. This in turn
hurts the standing of the monarchy.
Louis the 15th would preside over
further years of internal mismanagement
as the nation edged ever closer to
internal strife. The heavy taxation
system known as the taille, which fell
primarily on the peasantry, combined
with a series of food shortages and the
perceived excess of court, meant by the
time of the monarch's death in 1774,
France was essentially a tinderbox. Upon
Louis the 16th's coming to the throne in
1774,
he was largely shackled by the
disastrous economic inheritance and the
wider damage left by France's imperial
losses. He did, however, give support at
a crucial time to the revolutionary
cause in the American War of
Independence, which helped turn the
conflict global and edge the odds in the
colonists' favor, while also deepening
France's debt crisis. It is also
important to note that reform was
attempted. Ministers such as Turgot,
Necker, and Calonne tried to restrain
spending, rationalize taxation, and push
some of the burden onto privileged
elites, but these efforts ran into
resistance from entrenched interests,
the parlements, and the Assembly of
Notables, while the crown itself
wavered. However, huge sums of money
were still spent on state functions and
the upkeep of lavish properties. This
included the sprawling Palace of
Versailles, which had become synonymous
with brazen displays of wealth and
excess. By the late 1780s, the deeper
fiscal crisis was being driven above all
by debt, war costs, and a tax system
that could not effectively reach the
privileged, while court spending
remained politically toxic because it
symbolized a monarchy detached from its
subjects.
For a kingdom already burdened by
inequality, privilege, and a distorted
tax system, this only sharpened the
sense that the monarchy lived in a
different world from its subjects. Along
with the unjust tax system, poor
harvests, and rising bread prices, these
were some of the sparks that would help
light the fuse on the French Revolution.
Though sporadic regional riots had been
occurring in the years prior as a result
of citizen discontent, events would
gather pace in 1789. Under pressure from
the national crisis, King Louis the 16th
convenes the Estates General for the
first time since 1614 in an attempt to
create a sense of inclusion and stem the
crisis. However, it wasn't enough.
Popular resentment was sky high as was
the appetite for change fueled by
decades of enlightenment ideals. July
saw the iconic storming of the Bastille.
In the weeks that followed and amidst
the great fear in the countryside, the
National Assembly moved much further. On
the nights of the 4th of August, it
struck at feudal dues and privileges and
later that month, it issued the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of
the Citizen.
This was a key moment in the destruction
of the old order and the modernizing of
the nation. The Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen,
adopted in late August 1789, was a
formative document which represented the
ideals of the early revolution and would
go on to influence constitutional
thought and democratic movements for
centuries. However, chaos and rapidly
changing dynamics characterized this
period. Attempts were made initially at
a constitutional monarchy with King
Louis still in place as more of a
figurehead. These were brought to an end
in 1792 though, when the king was
deposed in an insurrection by
revolutionary factions dissatisfied at
the pace of reforms.
This led to the establishment of the
French First Republic, which would
persist until its replacement by
Napoleon's empire in 1804, as well as
the bloody end of the French monarch
with Louis' execution in January 1793.
The replacement of a centuries-old
monarchic framework with a citizen-ruled
country proved a challenging process,
and conflict dominated the leadership
over the next years. A new governing
body, the Committee of Public Safety,
would oversee a year-long reign of
terror in which political enemies and
others were executed. Around 17,000 were
officially put to death, with thousands
more dying in prison or without formal
trial. This eventually gave way to the
more collective Directory, which
persisted for another 4 years. However,
racked by internal division and
weakness, conditions were ultimately set
for Napoleon to seize power for himself.
The young commander was on the
ascendancy, having distinguished himself
in warfare such as the Battle of Toulon
against royalists and foreign allies
including Britain. He had also notably
helped put down a royalist insurrection
in Paris. Here, at the Place du
Carrousel, he deployed cannons loaded
with grapeshot to wipe out the first
line of charging royalists, thus
ensuring victory and his increasing
standing in the nation. Ever the
opportunist and seeing the nation racked
by these divisions, Napoleon made his
move. In the coup of November 1799, he
seized power and established the
Consulate. This council, with Napoleon
as first consul at its head, would rule
France for nearly 5 years before he
first made himself consul for life and
then crowned himself emperor in 1804.
Even in the years prior, he had been
growing increasingly authoritarian, and
it seemed clear many of the ideas of the
Revolution were being lost to this new
self-styled emperor. Arguably, the near
constant war mounted by France's
neighbors against her who were hostile
to the revolution, and this new
anti-monarchist threat had created the
conditions for Napoleon. External
military pressure gave rise to the need
for a military strongman, which a
citizen rule model in its nascency
couldn't compete with. Despite the
trampling of many of the revolution's
ideals by Napoleon on his path to
emperor, he did still carry out many
reforms. These proved significant in
modernizing the nation, albeit often
unaligned with the intentions of the
late 18th century movement, which had
swept away the monarchy. Napoleon can be
seen as the figure who finalized the
process of the centralization of power
around the ruler. This had been an
ongoing struggle for French kings from
the earliest times of the nation, with
many regional nobles enjoying near
autonomy for long periods. Now, however,
as an emperor in the style of Caesar,
Napoleon gathered vast power around
himself at his courts in Paris. A new
class of capable prefects were charged
with administering France's regions.
Powerful and important figures, but
crucially servants of the state and not
nobles of the past, presenting
themselves as rulers. This served to
simplify and increase the efficiency of
administrative processes, also providing
more uniformity across France's widely
varying regions.
He oversaw mass infrastructure
development, centralization of
education, and an emphasis on
meritocracy over inherited rights of
nobles. The taxation system, which had
effectively collapsed through the years
of the revolution, was also rebuilt and
developed into a modern and efficient
example of the era. With it in place,
France could plan ahead, better fund its
military, and generally function as what
we would recognize as a more modern
nation-state. In the area of religion,
the radical departure made by the early
revolution was abandoned, and relations
normalized with the Catholic Church
through the Concordat of 1801. This
helped restore working relations with
the papacy, brought Catholic worship
back into a recognized public framework,
and reduced one major source of
instability, though on terms that kept
the state firmly in control of
appointments and much of church life.
Napoleon, ever the pragmatist, also
granted tolerance to other religious
denominations, making a return to the
sectarian conflicts of earlier centuries
less likely, even if tensions hardly
vanished altogether. In many of these
areas, it can be seen Napoleon was
informed by Enlightenment ideals,
himself also holding the sciences and
arts in high regard. This is embodied in
the Napoleonic Code, too, which
consolidated equality before the law,
civil property rights, and the end of
feudal privilege, while standardizing
inheritance, though it also strengthened
paternal authority and limited women's
rights compared with the revolution.
Many of these civil principles, though
not all, have remained cornerstones of
the nation. However, in terms of his
personal approach to rule, it was more
autocratic emperor than the citizen
democracy envisaged by the Enlightenment
thinkers. Regardless, Napoleon ushered
in an era of dominance for France,
instilling a confidence which had faded
through the turbulent revolutionary
years. His program, though, ultimately
would be defined and dominated by
external threats. They helped ensure his
reign was relatively short, and that
chaos would once again return to French
rule. From before his rise to power,
rival European states had been agitating
against revolutionary France. Its
anti-monarchical turn was seen as a
major threat, but so too was its
expanding power in Italy, the Lower
Countries, Switzerland, and the German
lands. Napoleon concerned himself with
these struggles as a young military
leader, first at Toulon and then during
his Italian Campaign of 1796 to 1797,
which cemented his reputation as a truly
capable military leader. The Wars of the
Second Coalition then ran from 1798 to
1802, pitting France against a shifting
alliance that included Britain, Russia,
the Ottoman Empire, Austria, and various
Italian powers.
The coalition's basic aim was to roll
back French gains and contain the
revolutionary state before its political
model and armies spread further. In
1800, Napoleon crossed the Alps, struck
into northern Italy, and at Marengo,
turned what had nearly been a disastrous
day into a narrow victory that secured
Lombardy and strengthened his political
authority in Paris. For a moment, peace
seemed possible. The Peace of Amiens in
1802 paused the fighting. Yet, neither
Britain nor Napoleon trusted the
settlement to last. When war resumed in
1803, the conflict entered the phase now
usually called the Napoleonic Wars.
The Third Coalition, formed around
Britain, Russia, and Austria, later
joined by Sweden with goals that were
concrete as well as ideological.
To force France out of Italy and
Hanover,
to restore the independence of states
such as Holland and Switzerland, and to
curb a power that was beginning to
dominate the continent. Napoleon
answered with one of the most brilliant
operational swings of his career.
Having massed an invasion army on the
Channel coast for a projected blow
against Britain, he suddenly wheeled
that force east, crossed the Rhine,
encircled an Austrian army at Ulm, and
marched on Vienna. He then lured the
allied armies into battle at Austerlitz
in December 1805.
With the destruction of the
Austro-Russian force became the
signature triumph of his rise.
It broke the Third Coalition, forced
Austria into the Peace of Pressburg, and
confirmed that France had not merely
survived the Revolution, she had become
the central military power of Europe.
That success, however, only reshaped the
map for the next round of the war.
Fourth Coalition was driven largely by
Prussian alarm at Napoleon's growing
influence in Germany, especially after
he organized the Confederation of the
Rhine under French protection, and
further reduced the independence of the
old Holy Roman world. In 1806, the
Prussian army was shattered at Jena and
Auerstedt, and in 1807, the Russians,
too, were beaten after the savage winter
fighting of Eylau and the decisive
battle of Friedland. The treaties of
Tilsit left Napoleon at the height of
his power. Prussia was humbled, French
influence spread deep into Central
Europe, and Napoleon could redraw
frontiers, elevate client rulers, and
use satellite states as buffers, allies,
and recruiting grounds. Yet, the same
victories created new burdens. To defeat
Britain, whom he could not overcome at
sea after Trafalgar, Napoleon turned to
economic warfare through the Continental
System, a blockade meant to
British commerce by closing European
markets to it. On paper, this was a
grand strategic substitute for naval
inferiority. In practice, it was
difficult to enforce, damaging for many
coastal economies, and deeply resented
by allies and subject peoples alike.
Portugal's refusal to comply helped pull
French forces into Iberia in 1807, while
Napoleon's intervention in the Spanish
Bourbon crisis in 1808 ignited the
Peninsular War. French armies won the
battle and occupied cities, but they
could not fully pacify the countryside
or stop British, Spanish, and Portuguese
resistance from returning again and
again. Guerrilla attacks, sieges, long
supply lines, and Wellington's growing
army turns the peninsula into a constant
drain on men, money, and attention.
Austria tried once more in the Fifth
Coalition in 1809, hoping French
distraction in Spain would create an
opening. Though Napoleon recovered from
the shock of Aspern-Essling and won the
bloody Battle of Wagram, forcing Austria
into the Treaty of Schönbrunn, even this
victory showed a change. He was still
formidable, but no longer effortlessly
irresistible.
Throughout, Napoleon demonstrated his
great skill as a commander and
statesman, securing stunning victories
across fronts and terrain. He excelled
at concentrating artillery and moving it
quickly on the battlefield, but his real
military edge was broader than that. He
refined the core system into a powerful
instrument, self-contained formations
with their own staffs, infantry,
cavalry, and guns that could march
separately, live off wider areas, and
then rapidly combine for battle. This
gave French operations a speed and
flexibility many opponents struggled to
match, especially in the great campaigns
from Ulm to Friedland. Promotion by
merit, mass mobilization, and the use of
allied contingents also allowed France
to field armies of enormous scale. At
home, these military achievements were
paired with enduring institutional ones.
He helped stabilize state finance
through the Bank of France, built a more
centralized administrative machine
through prefects, expanded lycée and
state-directed education, and created
the Legion of Honor to reward service
rather than birth woman. In the legal
sphere, the Civil Code of 1804
systematized the law, entrenched
equality of male citizens before it,
secured property rights, and confirmed
the destruction of feudal privilege,
even as it also restored a strongly
patriarchal family order, and narrowed
some of the gains women had seen under
the Revolution.
These achievements mattered because they
outlasted his battlefield empire.
But the empire itself increasingly
depended on continued victory. The
Continental System antagonized both
friends and subjects. British sea power
blunted its effects, and Napoleon's
domination of Europe forced other rulers
into repeated efforts to break free.
Russia, in particular, drifted away from
his system, and in 1812, he launched an
invasion that would fatally damage the
whole structure.
He assembled the largest army Europe had
yet seen, and expected the campaign to
be decided quickly.
But the Russians traded space for time,
withdrawing inland, scorning a decisive
peace after Borodino, and abandoning
Moscow rather than surrendering the war.
When Napoleon retreated, starvation,
cold, exhaustion, disease, and constant
attacks shredded the Grande Armée. What
returned west was not the instrument
that had won Austerlitz. Sensing
weakness at last, his enemies gathered
in the Sixth Coalition. Even though
Napoleon still showed flashes of
brilliance in 1813 and again in the 1814
campaign in France, the decisive defeat
at Leipzig destroyed what remained of
French dominance in Germany and Poland,
and the allies then invaded France
itself.
Paris fell in 1814, Napoleon abdicated,
and was exiled to Elba. His return
during the Hundred Days briefly revived
the struggle, but the Seventh Coalition
mobilized immediately, and Wa- terloo in
June 1815 became his final defeat. He
abdicated again and was sent to Saint
Helena, where he would spend the rest of
his life. Nonetheless, he had made his
mark with a host of reforms and etched
himself into the cultural memory of
France. A symbolic ruler who had
overseen a period of French dominance in
Europe and stabilization following the
bloody revolutionary years. As had long
been the wish of France's enemies, the
Bourbon royal line was restored first in
1814 and then again after the Hundred
Days in 1815 following Napoleon's fall.
Foreign troops remained in France until
indemnities were paid, while Bonapartist
figures were purged from office. Though
it might seem like a step back from the
Revolution and Napoleonic years, the
reality was more complicated. The
restored monarchy didn't return to
absolute rule, it had to govern
constitutionally. Much of the lands lost
by the nobility was never restored, and
many of the key civic rights established
over previous decades remained firmly in
place. This shows that while they were
desperate to quell revolutionary threats
to their near familial rule across
Europe, there was an awareness that
coming down too hard could simply
reignite a new revolution.
This too shows the power of the French
populace and the value of their
hard-fought gains over the previous
years.
The last of the restored Bourbon
monarchs, Charles X, upset this balance
though. He sought to deepen compensation
for landowners who'd lost out in the
revolution, as well as restore a level
of pomp and brazen displays of wealth to
court similar to the Ancien Régime era.
Consequently, in 1830, he was overthrown
in the July Revolution, ushering in a
new shift in power dynamics.
The July Revolution of 1830 was less
socially broad than 1848 and was driven
heavily by liberal elites, though
Parisian workers were also crucial in
the fighting. Many of the rapidly
growing population of French merchants
and new money families felt the emphasis
placed by Charles X on the old noble
class excluded their interest.
Through the installation of another
monarch, this time Louis Philippe from
the Orléans family branch, they saw
their interests and opportunity for
further advancement better represented.
In his reign as Louis Philippe I,
he remembered those who had helped lift
him to power, governing in large part on
behalf of this growing middle class.
However, he did represent key changes in
certain areas and can be seen as more of
a modern technocratic leader compared to
earlier Bourbon monarchs. He rejected
the pomp of court and surrounded himself
with businessmen rather than nobles. He
changed the royal title from King of
France to King of the French, a subtle
difference but one which significantly
recognized his legitimacy as granted by
the population rather than by God. He
also restores the old French tricolor
leaving the white Bourbon restoration
era flag with all its aristocratic
associations. Revolution though would
return again in 1848. Unlike the July
Revolution of 1830, this one ushered in
greater change with its broader popular
support and more rigorous demands. Louis
Philippe was deposed ending the July
monarchy and ushering in the Second
French Republic. This came amid a
popular desire to return to the
enlightenment principles and civic
rights of the First Republic. However,
the movement was plagued by infighting
and factionalism and despite their
success in ousting the king, the
foundations were weak.
In this climate, Napoleon's nephew,
Louis Napoleon Bonaparte gained election
as president of the new republic
presenting himself as an
anti-establishment candidate. However,
due to the inherent weakness of the
system, he was able to seize power in a
coup in 1851 installing himself as
Emperor Napoleon III. Thus began the
Second French Empire and again, a
movement born in popular unrest was
consolidated by an authoritarian ruler.
As with his uncle, Louis Napoleon would
clamp down on civic reforms and
political movements while still
overseeing a period of stability and
growth for France economically.
This included the acceleration of
industrial growth, major infrastructure
investment, and overseas expansion,
while new banks helped finance parts of
the economy. The 1850s, therefore, saw a
relative boom, which helped at least
placate some of the demands from his
opposition.
However, into the next decade, public
discontent was growing with his
authoritarianism and censorship of the
press.
Louis relaxed
in response, but this only ended up
fueling radicalism, especially among
industrial workers. The final nail in
the coffin for his reign was the rise in
Prussian power, which he had failed to
confront effectively. France's swift
defeat in the war with Prussia in 1870
led to the collapse of his rule. Louis
fled to England, and the Third French
Republic was declared. This iteration
would continue until invasion by German
forces in World War II, making it the
longest period of constant rule since
before the revolution. While internal
factionalism remained between royalist
sympathizers, their more radical
counterparts, and everything else in
between, it was nevertheless a period of
more stable rule. The tax base grew,
centralization progressed with major
regional differences eroded,
industrialization advanced, and the
economic middle classes grew.
Externally, it was also a period of
colonial expansion not seen since before
the revolution. French presence in West
Africa expanded significantly, as well
as possessions in Indochina. All of this
helped build national pride and unity.
Though a simplification of some of
France's complex internal divisions, the
later part of this period, especially
from between the 1890s to the outbreak
of World War I is often called the Belle
Époque denoting the economic growth,
technological advances, and general
optimism of the era. However,
unfortunately brutal events of a new
European war would soon shatter this
spirit.
The colorful period of 18th and 19th
century France was packed full of
significant events for the nation.
From the final days of an opulent Ancien
Régime through to the bloody revolution
and sweeping changes it ushered in,
these years tore down old structures and
forced France to redefine who held power
and on what basis. These would include
the enshrinement in law of some key
civic principles and enlightenment
ideals as well as providing the
conditions for the rise of Napoleon and
decades of new European conflict. So,
how did France become modern? Not
through one clean revolution, but
through repeated cycles of revolution,
terror, empire, restoration, and
republic. These were centuries of great
upheaval which ultimately gave way to a
truly modern France.
In the next episode, we will explore how
France evolved from the end of the 19th
century to present day.
The maps in our videos, those are the
light versions. For our shop, we take
the same research and go all in. Finer
line work, higher resolution, extra
texture, geographic details that would
get lost in a video. These are built for
people who want the real thing.
Something you can reference, hang up, or
just own because it's the version we
actually wanted to make. The kind of map
you don't scroll past, you keep. Check
your favorite on our website at
knowledgeia.co or by clicking the link
in the description.